# The Effect of Gender Identity on Learning Outcomes

Possible causes of the persistent gender gap in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields are hotly debated, as are its proposed solutions. At the college level, recruiting more female faculty to teach STEM classes has been suggested as an option to reduce the gender gap based on the potential to attract and retain female students through a role model effect. While a growing body of literature has examined the role of instructor gender at the higher education level, it typically focuses on academic outcomes and in-person education. The increasing prevalence of online learning through video presents a new facet to this discussion and one that has received less attention from researchers. This paper undertakes a unique approach by exposing students to identical content for videos (utilizing a lecture about G​ ame of Thrones​ as a basis for understanding) recorded by both male and female instructors and measuring students’ learning outcomes. In general, we find little to indicate a significant relationship between instructor gender, student gender, and student performance, but we discuss some interesting findings with regard to the order of instructors and female student outcomes. We conclude by discussing the implications of these findings and further research possibilities.

Despite great progress in college enrollment, degree attainment, and representation in some fields historically dominated by men, women are still poorly represented in many areas of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). One proposed solution to rectify this problem is to encourage women to take part in online learning opportunities through formal educational institutions offering degree programs remotely; massive open online courses (or MOOCs) like Coursera, Udacity, or edX; or educational videos on YouTube. On one hand, these opportunities represent a tremendous democratization of knowledge: available anywhere at anytime, to anyone with access to the internet, and of particular benefit to those who have to balance their education with other responsibilities such as work and family. On the other hand, the gender gap in STEM careers and academic fields persists, and the vast majority of online video instructors in these subjects are male. This serves as a reminder that access to education is perhaps more complicated than simply opening the gates to anyone with any level of interest. How can we transform online instruction in STEM to provide true access​ t​ o opportunity for women?
The gender gap in STEM fields remains a large problem with many avenues for study. Solutions that address it have implications for long-term economic mobility, wage inequality, and opportunities for innovation from other more diverse populations. This study examines one specific aspect of the online learning environment that lends itself well to field experimentation: instructor gender on video.
The intersection of gender and education presents a rich environment for scholarly research. A great deal of the existing body of research centers specifically on young children and K-12 education. In studies addressing higher education environments, the focus is often on pure academic outcomes in a classroom or in-person learning environment (e.g., Bettinger & Long, 2005; Canes & Rosen, 1995; Carrell, Page, & West, 2010; Hoffman & Oreopoulos, 2009; Neumark & Gardecki, 1998; Robst, Keil, & Russo, 1998). Other literature examines less concrete measures of success and barriers to achievement, such as motivation (Solanki & Xu, 2018), stereotype threat (Kapitanoff & Pandey, 2017, Schroeder & Adesope, 2015), and student-instructor rapport (Lammers & Byrd, 2019). The prevalence of online learning has been touted by multiple papers and articles tracking trends in enrollment and completion (Shah, 2019, Dijsselbloem, 2018), but emphasizing the effects of distance and self-regulated learning rather than gender.
This study builds on existing research and addresses an underlying gap by focusing on online video learning and instructor gender. Our approach uses identical content for recorded videos from both male and female instructors, and measures student performance on several measures of learning. As students in a STEM field currently engaged in distance learning through a major university ourselves, we chose to examine online video learning specifically because of its ubiquity, scale, and potential to accelerate more equitable representation in STEM. In addition, a student’s experience in these courses may affect interest in subsequent learning, influencing major academic and career decisions. Our focus on online video learning fills an important gap in current literature that mainly focuses on in-person interactions as the basis for study.



To learn about the study, open the `Report_Gender_Based_Learning.pdf` to read about our project steps, data collection, results, and analysis. The file `Gender_Based_Learning.Rmd` contains the backend of our data analysis and regressions. Running this will require having the latest version of R. Our data can be found in `Subjects_Performance.csv`
